We Begin tonight with diplomacy and
worries of an escalating war in the
Middle East US Secretary of State
Anthony blinkin has met with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and
his War cabinet Lincoln reiterated us
support for Israel and the return of the
hostages held in Gaza but he also
sounded a cautionary note warning that
the daily toll of the war on civilians
in Gaza is far too
high Washington's top Diplomat arrives
in Israel for late is stop on a
week-long tour of the Middle East
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin is
calling for calm in the region to
prevent for war in Gaza from
spreading nice to see you blink held
talks with prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu Washington is trying to
balance support for Israel with limiting
civilian suffering blinkin emphasized
the need to protect the people of Gaza
and increase Aid we know that facing an
enemy that embeds itself among civilians
who hides in and fires from schools from
hospitals makes this incredibly
challenging but the daily toll on
civilians in Gaza particularly on
children is far too
high 3 months of fighting have left Gaza
devastated and thousands of gazans dead
blink called on Israel to start planning
for peace he said it must do more to
support moderate Palestinian leaders
to holdt new settlements and Stamp Out
settler violence it's our unique Bond
and America's enduring commitment to the
people of Israel that allows indeed
demands that were as forthright as
possible in the moments when the stakes
are highest when the choices matter the
most this is one of those
moments the role of Iran has raised
those Stakes defense minister yaa Galant
said increasing the pressure on Tran was
critical to preventing the war from from
spreading Iran which backs Hamas
supports a network of militant groups
throughout the
region whoi rebels in Yemen have
attacked and seized ships in the Red
Sea Hezbollah forces in southern Lebanon
are firing rockets at
Israel while in Iraq and Syria militants
aligned of Iran have attacked US troops
with rockets and drones we're determined
again that we uh not the escalation that
we don't have the conflict spread uh and
we've made that very clear uh but of
course if our Personnel if our forces
are are threatened or attacked we'll
take appropriate steps we'll
respond blink will continue his Tour on
Wednesday he's due to travel to the
occupied West Bank for talks of
Palestinian president Mahmud
abas joining me now here in the studio
is our Middle East analyst shaie rosanis
shaie was here with me we were list
listening to that press conference from
Anthony blinkin let's talk about the
biggest takeaways here did you notice a
change in the US's patience with the
Israeli Prime Minister when it comes to
making a way out for this war in Gaza
well that's clear undertone we've been
first of all we've been seeing the
Americans sending these messages in the
last days before the visit uh hinting at
netan that they are very serious in
their intents to move forward with a
longlasting plan for a peace in the
region with all the mo moderate Nations
AR Nations on board so um we're seeing
it uh blinkin saying the same things
again again very diplomatically he's
aach not not for no reason he's the
chief uh Diplomat for the Americans but
we hear behind closed doors that the
patience is running out there's more and
more pressure for Israel to decide is it
going to go for escalation or is it
going to turn its back on the on the
opportunities that the Americans are
offering for a national a regional pact
of security and long-lasting peace yeah
the the Secretary of State what struck
me as he said that the Israel has to be
a partner for the Palestinians um and
the Palestinians they also have to be a
reliable partner for the Israelis on a
path to whatting pie right first of all
statehood Palestinian statehood two
words that netan does not like like
seeing together uh combined and the word
partner is a very very contested word
when it comes to the Israeli Palestinian
conflict uh and you know the idea of
having a partner having no partner uh
we've seen it already by going back to
the prime minister
Barak former Israeli Prime Minister
talking about there's no partner back
then about um yaser Arad who was still
the head of the Palestinian Authority
back then trying to bring back the term
partner and the need for partnership
into the discussion is not in vain you
know they're choosing this word very
carefully they want Israelis to start
realizing this place where you're living
in this region nobody's going anywhere
Israelis are there Palestinian are there
you got to find a way to make it work
you got to make a partnership out of
this situation you got to use this
tragedy the way the Americans see it and
turn it into an opportunity and he also
mentioned what's going on in the West
Bank uh that also struck me there that
you know you can't there has to be Law
and Order in the West Bank correct the
Americans are very concerned because
we've seen Nan so astonishly against
anything connected to the Palestinian
Authority and and blinkin says Israel
need to stop undercutting the
Palestinian Authority it is in Israel's
best interest to let the Palestinian
Authority Thrive because of the security
coordination because of the people that
are happy that are satisfied that are
working that are part of society are not
people that are busy too much with
Terror and we've been seeing it again
and again and again and um this is what
they're trying to convince Netanyahu in
but this is breaking some of his more
you know the objection Netanyahu has to
this idea of Palestinian statehood is is
very deep we've seen it as part of his
as a stone of his uh of his policy for
the last 15 years and if we're talking
about less of a conflict in Gaza the
threat on the border northern border
with Lebanon that is actually even cuter
than it was let's say a few weeks ago
isn't it correct we've seen it last week
since the assassination of U he is a
chief Hamas former operative um it's
clear that things are more tense in the
last days uh there's been we've seen
Americans uh talking about their fear
that n we might be using this escalation
for political reasons um against their
wishes they would want to see everything
scaling down and they would definitely
not want to see a spill over into
Lebanon into Shiite uh access connecting
to Iran and forth it seems from uh his
response to some of the questions he's
he's content with the answers he's been
hearing from Israelis about them not
wanting to see escalation uh we still
need to be very careful not wanting
escalation and having escalation do not
necessarily uh correlate in the m e
these things are so tense and can go
either way any moment our Middle East
analyst shaie rosanas as always shaie
good to have you here thank you wel
friend US Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin is in Israel as part of a
week-long diplomatic tour aimed at
trying to prevent prent an escalation of
the war in Gaza a short time ago he met
with Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and is due to hold talks later
with the Israeli War cabinet he's
expected to press them to do more to
protect civilian lives and to prevent
the war in Gaza from escalating into a
wider conflict I've just come from a
number of countries in the region uh
Turkey Greece uh Jordan cutter United
Arab Emirates Saudi Arabia and I want to
be able to share some of what I heard
from those Leaders with the president as
well as with the prime minister in the
cabinet later today um and of course
we'll have an opportunity to sit with
the families of some of the hostages and
uh discuss our Relentless efforts to
bring everyone home and back with their
families uh and there's lots to talk
about uh particular about the way
forward and blinkin just met with prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his War
cabinet as well tww special
correspondent AA Ibrahim has joining us
now from Jerusalem so a just tell us a
little bit more about what is being
discussed today we know uh not all of
the conversations are open but we do
have some ideas of what's going
on the secretary of state is visiting
Israel not for the first time since
October 7th but at a very critical
moment in the conduct of this war um
they increased uh demands by the
International Community for Israel to
scale back the war in Gaza and certainly
that is a message that uh the secretary
of state will be coming to his Israeli
counterparts with especially that this
visit to Israel comes at the back of a
regional tour where he's met with a
number of uh other uh Regional uh
leaders there's also going to be
discussions about the proverbial day
after uh what happens once the war is
over and in that area there's not um
there's there's some disagreements
between the vision that the Americans
have put forth and some of the
statements that we've heard from Israeli
officials just as an example uh the
United States wants to see a refurbished
revitalized uh sorry rehabilitated uh
Palestinian Authority be part of the
future in Gaza but we we've heard from
various Israeli officials that that is
that is something that they uh reject so
a lot to discuss but certainly talks
will be overshadowed by a number of
disagreements between uh the two
partners and blinkin we know will travel
to the West Bank on Wednesday what is he
hoping to achieve
there so probably there will be more
discussions as I just mentioned on what
what role can the Palestinian Authority
play in the future uh of Gaza after uh
the war the Palestinian Authority does
not govern Gaza but it does govern parts
of the West Bank but it is seen as weak
and ineffective by um a lot of
Palestinians they have not had elections
in a very uh long time and so the
American Visions is is to try and
rehabilitate and uh reform the
Palestinian Authority so that it can be
an effective productive uh uh part of
gaza's uh future there's also increasing
since October 7th increasing reports of
Israeli extremist settler violence in
the Westbank that the United States uh
has spoken out against and so that is
also likely to be a a topic of
discussion uh when the Secretary of
State visits tomorrow DW special
correspondent a Ibrahim in Jerusalem
thank
you now Israel is under going growing
pressure to allow more Aid into Gaza the
opening of a second Crossing has not
significantly increased deliveries Aid
trucks are delayed waiting for security
checks at the Israeli km Shalom crossing
the UN says only around 120 trucks a day
are entering far below the number needed
Medical Aid is also being held up by
fighting in central Gaza most of the 2.3
million population have been displaced
and now rely on aid for
survival Sarah Davies joins us from Aman
she is with the international Committee
of the rest Red Cross thank you so much
for your time this afternoon what are
you hearing from inside Gaza how much
Aid is actually getting
through thanks so much for having me
Sarah in Gaza right now the situation is
incredibly dire uh what we are seeing is
a catastrophic situation that is only
worsening I think it's very important
that we remember that regardless of how
much Aid actually enters Gaza it also
needs to be effectively and safely
distributed and right now that's not
able to happen with things like the
ongoing armed hostilities the sheer
number of people who are as you said
displaced uh living on roads the rubble
the debris the Telecommunications
challenges people are not receiving the
aid or the supplies that they really
desperately need of course our teams are
working to the best of their abilities
but there are many many challenges uh
that are currently being faced for
civilians to to receive
Aid the World Health Organization is
also warning that the health system is
collapsing in Gaza um at a rapid Pace
give us a sense of what you at the icrc
are hearing tell us about the situation
inside the
hospitals so we do of course have a
surgical team in the European Gaza
Hospital uh we've had rotations of this
surgical team but they lack supplies uh
the health system is a huge concern for
us right now public health infectious
diseases the the number and the rate of
things like amputations that are having
to occur because people cannot receive
the medical treatment that they need in
time there are the burns the severe
wounds um displaced people have also set
up tents in hospitals in the corridors
because they they don't feel as's
anywhere else safe to go medical
professionals the local medical
professionals who have tirelessly worked
for nearly 3 months now uh have
continued without without a break
they're they're reaching exhaustion some
of these medical professionals have also
being displaced themselves multiple
times there is not enough drugs there
not enough anesthesia GW simple tools
more uh comprehensive tools there is
simply not enough medical supplies to be
able to deal with the increasing medical
needs that
exist meanwhile in Israel and I just
like to ask you about um some of the
reporting that we're hearing there have
been some calls for your organization in
particular to intervene and ensure the
well-being of Israeli hostages currently
held by Hamas and I'd just like to ask
you first of all is that happening and
if not
why so since the 7th of October we have
been calling for the immediate release
of these hostages and for our access to
them we have reiterated that hostage
taking is prohibited under International
humanitarian law at this time we have
not received access to these hostages uh
in order for us to as you say check on
their well-being uh provide them with
any necessary medications and of course
reconnect and re establish the contact
between them and their family members
who are desperately waiting for news who
have spent sleepless nights not knowing
uh what's happening to their their
family member to their friends to their
neighbor we will continue calling for
this access publicly as well as in our
direct dialogue with all parties to this
conflict but what is needed are the
necessary conditions for the
international Committee of the Red Cross
to have access to these hostages it's
not a simple matter of of yes or no we
need an agreement between the parties
involved because it it is an armed
conflict Zone we need to ensure that our
teams can access these hostages and that
no further harm comes to the hostages
because of this we need a firm agreement
which we do not take part in negotiating
so that we can then step in in our role
as a neutral intermediary to facilitate
either the the release and transport of
these hostages out of Gaza or access
them and provide them with the the
medical uh needs that they have thank
you so much for providing that context
on what your organization um is
experiencing and seeing in Gaza Red
Cross spokesperson Sarah Davies we
appreciate your
time thank you so
much